so let's recap what we've learned about
the while do-while loops continue and
break keywords on the screen we've got
the while loop syntax as you can see
it's got the while keyword and then
there's a condition in parentheses then
we have a code block and this loop
executes if the condition is true notice
here that there's no semicolons so the
while loop just has a condition if we
need to increment a variable then we have
to do it manually
inside the loop if we want to use a
variable in the condition we have to
declare that variable outside of the
while loop
now with the for loop we had the
initialization condition and iteration
in the same line I'm going to show you a
comparison for that but firstly let's
see the do-while loop so here's the do
while loops syntax we've got the do
keyword at the top and right up to the
do keyword we've got a code block the
left the right curly braces notice
again that there's no semicolon after
the do keyword after the block there's a
while condition in other words after the
right curly brace is that while keyword
and then a condition in parentheses and
then a semicolon at the end the
semicolon is required for do-while keep
in mind that do-while will execute at
least once the condition is at the
bottom so the code executes once this is the
code in the code block and then the
condition is checked unlike the while
loop the condition was checked at the
top so that's the syntax of the do-while
loop let's move on alright so on
screen now we've got the while loop and
a for loop that executes the same codes
in other words it's the same logic
ultimately that's going to be displayed
so there's going to be executed so
notice firstly that with the while loop
we have initialization of our variable
count outside of the while loop and the
iteration or increment in the while loop
so in other words all three parts the
initialization condition and the
iteration are on different lines now
contrast that to the for loop everything
in this case the initialization the
condition and iteration are on the same
line and each is separated by a
semicolon as you can see we've got the
initialization part then the semicolon
the condition part with another
semicolon and the last one is the
increment or the iteration part but
notice that the iteration path theirs no
semicolon in the for loop so again this
code will actually work the same and
give you the same results so you can see
the differences with the while using
while and using for so let's move on and
see some steps with continue and break with
the while loop so here we've got some
very simple code using the while loop
and two if statements so what the code
does it will print the numbers from five
to ten now this can be simplified with
different conditions and without a break
and continue but it's a good example to
see how they continue and break key
words or statements work so first we
initialize them the variable number with
a value 0 that's step one on the screen
then the while loop starts and it
increments the number so the number
has now the first time it starts has
got the value 1 now we've got an if
statement so let's move on now with the
if statement so the if statement is
checking the condition in our case this
is step one on the screen number less
than or equal to five so we've now got
a test for one being the value
current value of number being less than
equal to five which is true so therefore
the code inside the if statement will
execute so first it print skipping
number than the value 1 and then the
continue statement bypasses the
remaining code at the while loop and
continues with the condition of the
while loop so in other words we could
say it jumps back to the start of the
while in this case since the number is
it checks 1 less than 15 and that's true
as well and again the number is
incremented so it's now got the value of
2 now this will be repeated until the if
condition is false so in other words
until the number is greater than 5 so
I'm going to skip those steps because
they're almost the same just the number
value is getting incremented it's the
same code in the if statement executed
each time so we eventually get to the
part where the number is exactly 5 so
let's move on and see what happens once
the number has a value of 5 alright so I
skipped a couple of iterations as I
mentioned in the images and said the
same so now we continue in from the time
when the number has a value of 5 so
number is currently equal to 5 so
first it checks the condition 5 less
than 15 step one there and that's still
true the number gets incremented by one
it's now a value of 6 you can see it's
getting incremented in step 2 then the
condition in the if statement is checked
in this case it's going to be step
that's step 3 so it's number less than
equal to 5 so it's effectively testing 6
less than equal to 5 and that's false so
the code in this if statement will not
execute at that point the code
within the code block for the if
statement so next we have the printing
out so that lines executed this is step
four and after that we've got another if
statement so this if statement checks
the condition number greater than or
equal to ten now our numbers got a
value six at the moment since it was
incremented in six greater than equal to
ten is false
inside this if statement so the code the
condition six greater than equal to ten
is false
so the code inside this second if
statement is not or will not execute
now the steps described get repeated
until the number gets a value of ten so
let's move on and see what happens once
the number has a value of ten alright again
we skipped a couple of iterations as I
mentioned in the images since they're
the same so we're now continuing when
the number has got the value of nine and
then so then again firstly it checks the
condition in the while loop which is
nine less than fifteen that's step one
and that's true so the while loop block
starts executing again the number is
incremented to ten in step two there the
next condition step three we're checking
if 10 is less than equal to 5 and that's
false so the code block inside the first
if statement is not executed and that's
step three there that's actually
checking that so therefore the code in
step four is executed and the numbers
printed out then again we've got a
second if statement that checks in this
case the condition ten greater than
equal to ten and that's true so the
block of this if statement will be
executed in the block we print the
message breaking at ten
since the number has the value of ten
greater than equal to ten is true there
and the break statement then exits the
loop so we tested for that in step five
in step six it's printing out breaking
at the number and it's got the break
statement and of course the break exits
the loop so the code continues after the
closing
brace of the while loop that's how with
continue break we can interrupt the
loop and depending on the condition we
can skip parts of the code or break out
of the loop well let's just move on and
just see the important things to
remember about while and do while now
firstly the while loop checks the
condition at the start before executing
the block contrast that to the do-while
loop the code is executed at least once
and then the conditions checked so
you're always guaranteed that the code
in the code block for a do-while loop is
executed well at least once so be
careful with conditions because it's
very easy to end up with an endless loop
in other words a loop that never ends
or to end up with a loop that never
executes and as a tip there always
check carefully the conditions
expressions to make sure that doesn't
happen and we can interrupt the
loop as you saw by using and continue
and or a break statement with the
continue keyword the loop will bypass
the part of the code that is below it
and then continue with the next
iteration but the break keyword will
exit the loop depending on the condition
that we're checking so that's it that's
a recap of the while and do while as
well as the continue and break keywords
hope you got a lot out of that and I'll
see you in the next video